---
layout: post
title: Everything you need to know about 5G
cover-img: /assets/img/5g-tech.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/5g-tech.jpg
---

5G is here — Well, sort of. The 5th generation of wireless network technology has the potential to transform the internet with its dramatic speed and reduced latency — the time it takes to receive a response to the information sent. But in 2020, 5G is like ‘Folding Phones’. They are not ready for commercial use, but we are seeing a glimpse of the future. A 5G connection could theoretically hit 10 gigabits per second (Gbps) — that is 100 times faster than the data networks we all use today. It would just take a little over 3.5 seconds to download a 2-hour movie!

So when can we start using 5G? Well, not yet. It is estimated that even by 2025, this network will lag 4G and 3G in terms of global mobile connections. 5G’s mainstream existence is encountering multiple hurdles. According to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), 5G could interfere with meteorological satellite observations and thereby undermine the accuracy of weather forecasts. But the most significant hurdle is the cost. 3G and 4G networks are relatively cheaper to set up as they are capable of rolling on existing radio frequencies. But to get gigabit speeds, carriers like Verizon and AT&T will have to use higher frequencies, known as millimeter-wave. This millimeter-wave demands brand-new infrastructure as they drop off faster with distance than lower-frequency signals, and the massive amount of data they transfer will require more connections than landline internet. So cellular providers will have to use a large number of smaller, lower-power base stations rather than fewer, more powerful macrocells to offer the multi-gigabit speeds that millimeter-wave networks promise.

The future of this modern technology is indubitably promising. The subsequent generations of driverless vehicles will interact with other cars and smart roads to improve safety and manage traffic. While automobiles are exchanging small packets of information, they need to do so almost instantly. Even half a second delay in response time could result in a catastrophe. That’s where 5G’s millisecond latency comes into play when a packet of data shoots directly between two automobiles or bounces from a car to a small cell on a lamp-post. What about phones? The biggest change 5G may bring is in virtual and augmented reality. As phones transform into devices meant to be used with VR headsets, the consistent speeds of 5G will give the user an internet-augmented world. This might not happen overnight, but 5G is coming.
